Stone me – what an incredibly professional production! I have downloaded the 13 issues and have ploughed through the first two. As a retired IT teacher, this is just what we need and it is presented in such a way that anyone can get something out of it – young and old. My Pi takes me back to my Acorn Atom days and a soldering iron, and it is good to see young students taking this up again. I am currently working with a Year 7 young lady doing some programming and simple control circuits, and she is loving it – well, we both are, really! 
I spend my life writing a complex engineering program in PowerBASIC – if only this was available for Linux (and it is not for the want of asking) – and getting to grips with the syntax of Python has been an interesting challenge.  My only feeble complaint is that setting up a printer is a nightmare! I can get it to print from LibreOffice, but not the command prompt, though I am sure that the answer will be in the issues I have not looked at yet.
It is good to see Britain leading the world again in the field of microcomputers – well done Pi.
Iain Johnstone

First of all. GREAT magazine! Thanks for taking the risks to get it out there in the first instance. I bought the issues as soon as I saw I could and they turned up today (YAY!!)
Chris Burgess

Friday June 14, 2013. Escondido, California, USA. I got my magazines today! Hooray Hooray Hooray!

Homer Hazel

Just received my magazines and binder today. Wow! They are beautiful. This whole project has been great. I had selected the Signature Kit and am I ever glad. The hardware kit came some time ago and the whole thing was top quality. It meant a lot to have those books signed by Liz and Eben. Congratulations for a well executed project.

Tony Guerich

Just received my binder and mags - they look great. Thanks for all the effort you have put into this. And you just know that we all want Volume 2 now don't you :-)

Mark Pearson

288 pages of goodness just arrived! The Mags look awesome! Love the binder and stickers! Its been a bit of a wait but its definitely been worth it! The whole bundle is fantastic and the magazine quality is perfect, they look and feel like a premium magazine you would buy from a newsagents.  You can see right away the hard work that has gone into these and it is very much appreciated. 
THANK YOU!! to the whole MagPi team!! 
Time to crack on and start reading!

Nial Pearce
